U.S.R. underscore O. four dot T.X.T.
for vim version eight point two
last change
twenty twenty-one february twenty-two
vim user manual
by bram moolenaar
making small changes
this chapter shows you several ways of making corrections and moving text around
it teaches you the three basic ways to change text
operation motion
visual mode and text objects
O. four point one
operators and motions
O. four point two
changing text
O. four point three
repeating a change
O. four point four
visual mode
O. four point five
moving text
O. four point six
copying text
O. four point seven
using the clipboard
O. four point eight
text objects
O. four point nine
replace mode
O. four point ten
conclusion
next chapter
U.S.R. underscore O. five dot T.X.T.
set your settings
previous chapter
U.S.R. underscore O. three dot T.X.T.
moving around
table of contents
U.S.R. underscore T.O.C. dot T.X.T.
O. four point one
Operators and motions
in chapter two you learned the X. command to delete a single character
and using a count
four X.
deletes four characters
the D.W. command deletes a word
you may recognize the W. command as the move word command
in fact 
the D. command may be followed by any motion command
and it deletes from the current location to the place where the cursor winds up
the four W. command
for example
moves the cursor over four words
the D. four W. command deletes four words
vim only deletes up to the position where the motion takes the cursor that's
because vim knows that you probably don't want to delete the first character of
a word if you use the E. command to move to the end of a word vim guesses that
you do want to include that last character whether the character under the
cursor is included depends on the command you used to move to that character the
reference manual calls this exclusive when the character isn't included and
inclusive when it is the dollar sign command moves to the end of a line the D.
dollar sign command deletes from the cursor to the end of the line this is an
inclusive motion thus the last character of the line is included in the delete
operation there is a pattern here operator motion you first type an operation
command for example
D. is the delete operator
then you type a motion command like four L. or W.
this way you can operate on any text you can move over
O. four point two
changing text
another operator is C.
change
it acts just like the D. operator
except it leaves you in insert mode
for example
C.W. changes a word
or more specifically
it deletes a word and then puts you in insert mode
this C. two W. be escape contains these bits
C.
the change operator
two W.
move two words
they are deleted and insert mode started
be
insert this text
escape
back to normal mode
you will have noticed something strange
the space before human isn't deleted
there is a saying that for every problem there is an answer that is simple
clear
and wrong
that is the case with the example used here for the C.W. command
the C. operator works just like the D. operator
with one exception
C.W.
it actually works like C.E.
change to end of word
thus the space after the word isn't included
this is an exception that dates back to the old V.I.
since many people are used to it now
the inconsistency has remained in vim
more changes
like D.D. deletes a whole line
C.C. changes a whole line
it keeps the existing indent
leading white space
though
just like D. dollar sign deletes until the end of the line
C. dollar sign changes until the end of the line it's like doing D. dollar sign
to delete the text and then A. to start insert mode and append new text
shortcuts some operator motion commands are used so often that they have been
given a single letter command lowercase X. stands for D.L.  delete character
under the cursor uppercase X. stands for D.H.
delete character left of the cursor
uppercase D. stands for D. dollar sign
delete to the end of the line
uppercase C. stands for C. dollar sign
change to end of the line
lowercase S. stands for C.L.
change one character
uppercase S. stands for double C.
change a whole line
where to put the count
the commands three D.W. and D. three W. delete three words
if you want to get really picky about things
the first command
three D.W. deletes one word three times
the command D. three W. deletes three words once
this is a difference without a distinction
you can really put in two counts
however
for example
three D. two W. deletes two words
repeated three times
for a total of six words
replacing with one character
the R. command is not an operator
it waits for you to type a character
and will replace the character under the cursor with it
you could do the same with C.L. or with the S. command
but with R. you don't have to press escape to get back out of insert mode
using a count with R. causes that many characters to be replaced with the same
character
example
to replace a character with a line break use R. enter
this deletes one character and inserts a line break
using a count here only applies to the number of character deleted
four R. enter replaces four characters with one line break
O. four point three
repeating a change
the period command is one of the simplest yet powerful commands in vim
it repeats the last change
for instance
suppose you are editing an H.T.M.L. file and want to delete all the B. tags
you position the cursor on the first opening angle bracket and delete the B.
with command D.F. closing angle bracket you then go to the opening angle bracket
of the next closing B. tag and delete it using the period command the period
command executes the last change command in this case D.F. closing angle bracket
to delete another tag position the cursor on the opening angle bracket and use
the period command to with the first character in uppercase opening B. tag
generate closing B. tag a table of opening B. tag contents F. opening angle
bracket find first opening angle bracket D.F. closing angle bracket delete to
closing angle bracket
F. opening angle bracket
find next opening angle bracket
period
repead D.F. closing angle bracket
F. opening angle bracket
find next opening angle bracket
period
repeat D.F. closing angle bracket
the period command works for all changes you make
except for U.
undo
control R.
redo
and commands that start with a colon
another example
you want to change the word four to five
it appears several times in your text
you can do this quickly with this sequence of commands
slash four enter
find the first string four
C.W. five escape
change the word to five
N. find the next four
period
repead the change to five
N.
find the next four
period
repeat the change
E.T.C.
O. four point four
visual mode
to delete simple items the operator motion changes work quite well
but often it's not so easy to decide which command will move over the text you
want to change then you can use visual mode you start visual mode by pressing V.
you move the cursor over the text you want to work on while you do this the text
is highlighted finally type the operator command for example to delete from the
middle of one word to the middle of another word when doing this you don't
really have to count how many times you have to press L. to end up in the right
position you can immediately see what text will be deleted when you press D.  if
at any time you decide you don't want to do anything with the highlighted text
just press escape and visual mode will stop without doing anything selecting
lines if you want to work on whole lines
use V. to start visual mode
you will see right away that the whole line is highlighted
without moving around
when you move left or right nothing changes
when you move up or down the selection is extended whole lines at at time
for example
select three lines with uppercase V. lowercase double J.
selecting blocks
if you want to work on a rectangular block of characters
use control V. to start visual mode
this is very useful when working on tables
to delete the middle Q. two column
move the cursor to the Q. of Q. two
press control V. to start blockwise visual mode
now move the cursor three lines down with three J. and to the next word with W.
you can see the first character of the last column is included
to exclude it
use H.
now press D. and the middle column is gone
going to the other side
if you have selected some text in visual mode
and discover that you need to change the other end of the selection
use the O. command
hint
O. for other end
the cursor will go to the other end
and you can move the cursor to change where the selection starts
pressing O. again brings you back to to the other end
and you can move the cursor to change where the selection starts
pressing O. again brings you back to the other end
when using blockwise selection
you have four corners
O. only takes you to one of the other corners
diagonally
use O. to move to the other corner in the same line
note that lowercase O. and uppercase O. in visual mode work very differently
from normal mode
where they open a new line below or above the cursor
O. four point five
moving text
when you delete something with D.
X.
or another command
the text is saved
you can paste it back using the P. command
the vim name for this it put
take a look at how this works
first you will delete an entire line
by putting the cursor on the line you want to delete and typing double D.
now you move the cursor to where you want to put the line and use the P.
put
command
because you deleted an entire line
the P. command placed the text line below the cursor
if you delete part of a line
a word
for instance
the P. command puts it just after the cursor
more on putting
the P. command puts text like P.
but before the cursor
when you deleted a whole line with double D.
uppercase P. will put it back above the cursor
when you deleted a word with D.W.
uppercase P. will put it back just before the cursor
you can repeat putting as many times as you like
the same text will be used
you can use a count with lowercase P. and uppercase P.
the text will be repeated as many times as specified with the count
thus double D. and then three P. puts three copies of the same deleted line
swapping two characters
frequently when you are typing
your fingers get ahead of your brain
or the other way around?
the result is a typo such as T.E.H. for the
vim makes it easy to correct such problems
just put the cursor on the E. of T.E.H. and execute the command X.P.
this works as follows
X. deletes the character E. and places it in a register
P. puts the text after the cursor which is after the H.
O. four point six
copying text
to copy text from one place to another
you could delete it
use U. to undo the deletion and then P. to put it somewhere else
there is an easier way
yanking
the Y. operator copies text into a register
then a P. command can be used to put it
yanking is just a vim name for copying
the C. letter was already used for the change operator
and Y. was still available
calling this operator yank made it easier to remember to use the Y. key
since Y. is an operator
you use Y.W. to yank a word
a count is possible as usual
to yank two words use Y. two W.
example
notice that Y.W. includes the white space after a word
if you don't want this
use Y.E.
the double Y. command yanks a whole line
just like double D. deletes a whole line
unexpectedly
while uppercase D. deletes from the cursor to the end of the line
uppercase Y. works like double Y. it yanks the whole line
watch out for this inconsistency!
use Y. dollar sign to yank to the end of the line
O. four point seven
using the clipboard
if you are using the G.U.I. version of vim
G. vim
you can find the copy item in the edit menu
first select some text with visual mode
then use the edit or copy menu item
the selected text is now copied to the clipboard
you can paste the text in other programs
in vim itself too
if you have copied text to the clipboard in another application
you can paste it in vim with the edit paste menu item
this works in normal mode and insert mode
in visual mode the selected text is replaced with the pasted text
the cut menu item deletes the text before it's put on the clipboard
the copy
cut and paste items are also available in the popup menu
only when there is a popup menu of course
if your vim has a toolbar
you can also find these items there
if you are not using the G.U.I.
or if you don't like using a menu
you have to use another way
you use the normal Y.
yank
and P.
put
commands
but prepend double quote star before it
to copy a line to the clipboard
double quote asterisk double Y.
to put text from the clipboard back into the text
double quote asterisk P.
this only works on versions of vim that include clipboard support
more about the clilpboard can be found in section O. nine point three and here
clipboard
O. four point eight
text objects
if the cursor is in the middle of a word and you want to delete that word
you need to move back to its start before you can do D.W.
there is a simpler way to do this
D.A.W.
the D. of D.A.W. is the delete operator
A.W. is a text object
hint A.W. stands for a word
thus D.A.W. is delete a word
to be precise
the white space afterthe word is also deleted
or the white space before the word if it at the end of the line
using text objects is the third way to make changes in vim
we already had operator motion and visual mode
now we add operator text object
it is very similar to operator motion
but instead of operating on the text between the cursor position before and
after a movement command
the text object is used as a whole
it doesn't matter where in the object the cursor was
to change a whole sentence use C.I.S.
take this text
move to the start of the second line
on is an
now use C.I.S.
the cursor is in between the blanks in the first line
now you type the new
sentence another line
C.I.S. consits of the C.
change
operator and the is text object
this stands for inner sentence
there is also the as
a sentence
object
the difference is that as includes the white space after the sentence and is
doesn't
if you would delete a sentence
you want to delete the white space at the same line
then use D.A.S.
if you want to type new text the white space can remain
thus you use C.I.S.
you can also use text objects in visual mode
it will include the text object in the visual selection
visual mode continues
thus you can do this several times
for example
start visual mode with V. and select a sentence with as
now you can repeat as to include more sentences
finally you use an operator to do something with the selected sentences
you can find a logn list of text objects here
text objects
O. four point nine
replace mode
the uppercase R. command causes vim to enter replace mode
in this mode
each character you type replaces the one under the cursor
this continues until you type escape
in this example you start replace mode on the first T. of text
you may have noticed that this command replaced five characters in the line with
twelve others
the uppercase R. command automatically extends the line if it runs out of
chracters to replace
it will not continue on the next line
you can switch between insert mode and replace mode with the insert key
when you use backspace to make a correction
you will notice that the old text is put back
thus it works like an undo command for the previously typed character
O. four point ten
conclusion
the operators
movement commands and text objects give you the possibility to make lots of
combinations
now that you know how they work,
you can use N. operators with M. movent commands to make N. times M. commands
you can find a list of operators here
operator
for example
there are many other ways to delete pieces of text
here are a few common ones
lowercase X. delete character under the cursor
short for D.L.
uppercase X. delete character before the cursor
short for D.H.
uppercase D. delete from cursor to end of line
short for D. dollar sign
lowercase D. and W. delete from cursor to next start of word
lowercase D. and B. delete from cursor to previous start of word
lowercase D., I. and W. delete word under the cursor
excluding white space
lowercase D., A. and W. delete word under the cursor
including white space
lowercase D. and uppercase G. delete until the end of the file
lowercase D., G. and G. delete until the start of the file
if you use C. instead of D. they become change commands
and with Y. you yank the text
and so forth
there are a few common commands to make changes that didn't fit somewhere else
tilde
change case of the character under the cursor
and move the cursor to the next character
this is not an operator
unless tilde O.P. is set
thus you can't use it with a motion command
it doew work in visual mode
where it changes case for all the selected text
uppercase I.
start insert mode after moving the cursor to the first non blank in the line
uppercase A. start insert mode after moving the cursor to the end of the line
next chapter
U.S.R. underscore O. five dot T.X.T.
set your settings
copyright
see manual copyright
vim colon T.W. equals seventy-eight colon T.S. equals eight colon no E.T. colon
F.T. equals help colon no R.L. colon
